to number two this morning.
And last week, we really entered the third phase
of our annual theme.
Our theme, as you see on the banners here
behind me this morning,
great is the Lord and greatly to be praised.
And Psalm 48, verses one and two
has been our theme song all year.
And we sang that through twice this morning.
We sing it for each of our services
and certainly thank the Lord for the truth
that he has revealed to us in his precious word
that he is a great God.
And phase number one, as we started
in the month of January,
was really to discover God's greatness.
I believe, and I made the statement
in the very first Sunday of the year,
that everyone that walked through these doors that morning
would have said, I believe that God is great.
But if we really wanna add some meat to that statement,
we would say, why is God great?
And I've preached through a number of messages
where God has revealed and declared to us his greatness
and thus we have discovered the very truth
and we can say with the Psalmist,
as he said in Psalm 135, I know that the Lord is great.
And we find that as we've understood
and discovered the greatness of God,
we then transition into phase number two.
I don't remember exactly the dates,
I could look back at the messages,
but we transitioned into phase number two
and really dealt with the importance
of declaring God's greatness.
We live in the midst of a people,
we live in the midst of a world
that many that we come in contact with,
they do not know how great our God is.
And the Psalmist in understanding that our God is great,
he says, I will declare thy greatness
and we have a great privilege,
we have a great responsibility
to let others know how great our God is
and truly this morning we serve a great God.
Phase number three started last week
and really as we finish out the calendar year
with this theme of great is the Lord
and greatly to be praised,
the idea of this third phase, if you will,
of our theme is having a desire
to live in light of God's greatness.
So in other words, let me say it this way,
because of what I understand
regarding the person of the Lord Jesus Christ
and the greatness of God,
it should have an impact on how I live my life.
What we believe impacts our behavior,
our behavior reveals what we believe.
And as we started last week with this third phase,
we really started and began in the area of prayer,
in prayer.
I asked this question last week,
what is it that we're praying about?
What is it that's on your prayer list,
that's on my prayer list that only God can do?
What is it about your prayer life and my prayer life
that reveals truly that we believe that God is great,
that God is the God of the impossible,
that God is the God that says,
is anything too hard for me,
that God is the God that said,
call unto me and I will answer thee
and show thee great and mighty things
which thou knowest not,
the God who said that he's able to do
exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think.
And I wonder this morning, as we examine our prayer lives,
what is it in your prayer life and my prayer life
that reveals that we believe God is great?
Last week, we looked at Psalm 34
and we considered the prayer life of David
and we considered how that David said,
this poor man cried and the Lord heard him,
delivered him out of all of his troubles.
What a wonderful truth that we find there in Psalm 34
and the wonderful truth for us is that David is rehearsing,
he is sharing his own personal experience
and how he cried unto the Lord,
he sought the Lord and God delivered
and God answered and God worked,
but he tells us in several verses later
that the righteous cry and the Lord heard them
and the Lord delivered them out of all their troubles
and what a blessing to know that God hears us.
Now, we have a God who is able to do the impossible.
This morning, as we consider the subject of prayer again
and we'll do it again next week as well,
I wanna consider the life of Daniel,
the life of Daniel.
As we think about Daniel, as we mentioned the character,
the Bible character Daniel and our mind floods
with a number of events that are recorded in God's word
with regard to Daniel, perhaps even some particular areas
in which we would be aware of and have the knowledge
of Daniel being a man of prayer.
If we're to ask this morning and we're to fill out
a form of some level of tell me what you know about Daniel,
I'm sure that for many of us,
one of the things that would be on our list
is that Daniel was a man of prayer.
How do we say that?
Well, most of us are familiar with Daniel chapter number six
the events in Daniel six are quite familiar.
We won't be looking at them this morning,
but Daniel chapter number six,
remember there was a law that was signed into writing
that no one was allowed to ask any petitions
of anyone other than the King.
And when Daniel knew that the writing was signed,
what did he do?
Well, he went in and he prayed.
He went in and he prayed.
He knew that the writing had been signed.
He understood, he was aware of the consequences
of his decision that he would be cast into a den of lions.
And the Bible tells us that he went, he went home,
he opened his chambers toward Jerusalem.
I mean, he was not afraid.
He was not dealing with any type of distress over this.
He kneeled down on his knees and the Bible tells us
that three times a day he prayed
and gave thanks before his God.
But there's a little phrase that at the end of verse number
10 of Daniel six that says this, as he did a four time.
Daniel didn't pray because it was constituted being illegal.
He didn't pray because there was a signature
on some legislation that said you can't pray.
No, Daniel prayed because he was a man of prayer.
Daniel prayed because he believed that he served a God
who hears and answers prayer.
We find in Daniel chapter number six
that he's a man of prayer.
We know in Daniel chapter number nine,
as you read the prayer of Daniel,
what a powerful prayer it is.
In fact, he says that he set my face under the Lord God
to seek my prayer and supplications with fasting
and sackcloth and ashes and I prayed under the Lord my God.
Daniel nine records a powerful prayer in Daniel's life.
Daniel was a man of prayer.
Daniel believed that God heard and answered prayer.
This morning, I wanna focus our attention
and examine an event in Daniel's life
that's recorded for us in Daniel chapter two.
I've asked you to turn there this morning
and as we look and really the truth
of this particular passage, we could spend so much time
looking at all of the details with regard
to the circumstances, but we really wanna focus
our attention this morning on the middle section
of Daniel chapter number two because that's
where we read about the prayer of Daniel.
Begin looking there with me at verse number seven.
The Bible says, they answered again,
this is those that Nebuchadnezzar had called,
the magicians, astrologers, sorcerers, and Chaldeans.
They answered Nebuchadnezzar, they said this,
let the king tell his servants the dream
and we will show the interpretation of it.
The king answered and said, I know of certainty
that you would gain the time because you see
the thing is gone from me, but if you will not make known
unto me the dream, there is but one decree for you
for ye have prepared lying and corrupt words
to speak before me till the time be changed.
Therefore, tell me the dream and I shall know
that ye can show me the interpretation thereof.
The Chaldeans answered in verse number 10 before the king
and said, there is not a man upon the earth
that can show the king's matter.
Therefore, there is no king, lord, nor ruler
that asks such things of any magician
or astrologer or Chaldean.
And it is a rare thing that the king requireth.
There's none other that can show it before the king
except the gods whose dwelling is not with flesh.
Now skip down, if you will, to verse number 18, 19.
The Bible says this, then was the secret revealed
unto Daniel in a night vision.
Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
I'm gonna preach a message that I've titled there
from verse number 19, the secret was revealed unto Daniel.
The secret was revealed unto Daniel.
As we look at this passage of scripture,
we find in verses seven through 16,
if you're taking notes this morning,
number one, the situation reported.
The situation reported, Nebuchadnezzar had a dream
according to verse number one.
And the Bible tells us that in this dream,
that he was troubled greatly or as a result of the dream,
he was troubled greatly.
He commanded these magicians and astrologers
and sorcerers and Chaldeans to enter into his presence.
And here's what he required of them.
Tell me the dream and the interpretation.
Now, oftentimes, as you consider even that
which is reported here in the book,
in the second chapter of the book of Daniel,
when someone would have a dream
and they would call the magicians and astrologers
and all these people in to interpret,
what they would do, the standard format,
is they would tell the dream
and then those people would give an interpretation.
Well, here, Daniel says, I don't remember the dream.
And so you have to tell me the dream
and you have to tell me the interpretation.
And so these magicians and astrologers
and sorcerers and Chaldeans,
they're saying, no, this is impossible.
I mean, you're asking us a hard thing.
There's no man, notice what he says in verse number 10.
These men that are brought before the presence
of Nebuchadnezzar, they say,
there is not a man upon the earth
that can show the king's matter.
I mean, they were beside themselves.
They said, this is impossible,
what you're asking us to.
to do, you're telling us that you had a dream
and it's troubled you, but you can't tell us the dream
and you want us to tell you the dream and the interpretation.
You've lost your mind, this is impossible.
There's not a man upon the earth.
Therefore, they say this, there is no king, lord,
nor ruler that asks such things as any magician,
astrologer, or Chaldean.
No one has ever been asked to do this before.
That's what they're saying to Nebuchadnezzar.
You're putting us in a terrible position.
And the situation is reported to us,
it seems as we look at the text of scripture,
it seems quite obvious that Daniel is unaware
of these events that are transpiring for us
that are being recorded to us in the first several verses
of Daniel chapter number two.
I'm not sure where he was at the particular time,
what's going on, but he is unaware of what has transpired.
And so with these that had been gathered,
unable to answer the king,
Nebuchadnezzar is in a fit of rage.
The Bible tells us that the king responds,
notice in verse number 12,
for this cause the king was angry and very furious
and commanded to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
This irate ruler now issues an irrational decree,
kill all the wise men.
Can you imagine?
Daniel, by the way, would have been part
of that group of people.
And we find that as we look at what's taking place,
the captain, the king's captain,
a man by the name of Ariok is introduced to us here
with regard to what's taking place
because the decree went forth.
Notice this irate ruler makes this irrational decree
in verse number 12 to destroy all the wise men of Babylon.
And it tells us in verse number 13
that the decree went forth
that the wise men should be slain.
The wise men should be slain.
And they sought Daniel and his fellows to be slain.
So Daniel and his three companions,
Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah
are not there at the particular time.
And so they're going to seek for them
because they need to be part of the company
of all the wise men that are going to be sentenced,
put to death because the king has made this decree.
The Bible tells us that they're seeking for them
and it tells us in verse 14,
then Daniel answered,
notice what the Bible says,
with counsel and wisdom.
The way every day of our lives, we need God's wisdom.
Daniel did not know what was going to happen
on this particular day,
but we know that Daniel was a man of prayer.
And perhaps even as I've said before,
every day of our lives, we need wisdom
and we ought to pray God give us wisdom.
I don't know what I'm going to face today,
but I know that you know what I'm going to face today.
And I need wisdom.
If any man lack, let him ask of God
who giveth liberally and upbraideth not.
If we lack wisdom, we go to the all wise God
who promises to give wisdom.
And here Daniel answered with counsel and wisdom
to Ariok, the captain of the king's guard,
which was gone forth to slay the wise men of Babylon.
Listen, this situation is an unfortunate situation.
Daniel begins to have this conversation with Ariok.
Notice in verse 15,
he answered and said to Ariok, the king's captain,
why is the decree so hasty from the king?
Then Ariok made the thing known to Daniel.
So that particular time,
Daniel is informed of what we've just read
with regard to Nebuchadnezzar having a dream
and all of these individuals being brought to his presence
and their inability to be able to provide
the dream and the interpretation.
And Daniel is brought up to speed, so to speak,
with the events that have happened on this particular day.
And he finds out from Ariok why this thing is being done
so hasty and why the king has made this irrational decree.
We find that Daniel, as he's informed of this situation
that is being reported to us in Daniel chapter number two,
it's really the response of Daniel
that I wanna focus on this morning.
And we find that if you're taking notes,
number two this morning in verses 17 and 18,
I want you to notice not only do we see,
first of all, the situation reported,
but we see number two, the supplication recorded.
The supplication recorded.
Daniel, according to verse number 16,
as he responds to Ariok after hearing
of what transpired this particular day,
the Bible says that then Daniel went in
and desired of the king that he would give him time
and that he would show the king the interpretation.
This is very interesting to me,
the request that's made
and understanding the response of Daniel
and the supplication that's recorded.
We notice even in verse number 16,
as he says give him time
and notice what he says at the end of the verse
that he would show the king the interpretation.
There's a measure of confidence on the part of Daniel.
Why?
Because Daniel knows who God is.
Daniel understands the greatness of God.
Daniel understands the God who he serves.
No doubt in my life,
Daniel has seen God answer prayer in his life.
And we find that Daniel requests this time.
Now it's interesting because in verse number eight,
when those people that had been gathered
into Nebuchadnezzar's presence,
the king answered and said in verse number eight,
I know of certainty that you would gain the time
because you see the thing is gone from me.
And so he says to them in verse number nine,
but if you will not make known unto me the dream,
there is but one decree for you,
for you have prepared lying and corrupt words
to speak before me.
Tell me the dream and I shall know
that you can show me the interpretation thereof.
And so we find that Daniel then says to the king,
give me some time and I'll show you the interpretation.
There's a measure of confidence on the part of Daniel.
And Daniel makes this request,
but really as we think about the supplication
that is recorded for us here
in this passage of scripture,
we find in verse 17 that the Bible tells us
then Daniel went to his house,
noticed and made the thing known to Hananiah,
Mishael and Azariah, his companions.
Notice the first statement of verse 18
that they would desire mercies of the God of heaven
concerning this secret.
You know what they did?
They had a prayer meeting.
And I would submit to you this morning
that this irate ruler that made this irrational decree,
kill all the wise men.
Can you imagine?
And Daniel's immediate response, pray, pray, pray.
He hears of what's transpired.
He says, give me some time
because we need to have a prayer meeting.
We have a prayer meeting.
I think about the truth, hold your place here
and turn to the book of Philippians, if you will.
And I want you to look at a couple
of New Testament principles
and we'll get back to Daniel chapter number two here
in just a moment.
But in Philippians chapter number four,
we read a passage, a truth that is quite familiar to us.
We find that in Philippians four and verse number six,
the Bible says be careful for nothing.
Truly that means not to be full of care,
not to worry.
How many of you hear people say, I'm not worried,
I'm just concerned.
Man, we learn how to twist things up, don't we?
Honestly, be careful for nothing.
But in everything, by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God.
In Daniel chapter number two,
if Daniel would have responded with worry,
with full of care, how would that have helped him?
It would have helped him the same way it helps you.
Not at all.
Somebody said of worry, it's like a rocking chair.
It'll keep you busy, but it won't get you anywhere.
You ever sit in a rocking chair?
You can rock all day and you don't move.
You're not getting anywhere.
It'll keep you busy.
Somebody said, well, everything I worry about,
it just never happens.
As if their worry made it not happen.
Actually, what that reveals to us
is we worry about a lot of things
that never actually come to pass.
And here, the Bible says be careful for nothing.
But in everything, by prayer and supplication
with thanksgiving, let your request be made known unto God.
I am so thankful that we have a God
who has extended to us an invitation
that we can let our request be made known unto him.
And by the way, he can do something about it.
Isn't that awesome?
Daniel, he hears, I mean, listen,
I've never received news like Daniel received
in Daniel chapter number two.
I'm guessing that you haven't either.
I'm guessing that you've never received news
that, hey, we've come to get you
because we're taking you to be slain.
I've never received that news.
I'm not sure how I'd respond in that circumstance
or in that situation.
But I hope we'd respond like Daniel.
Can you give us some time?
We gotta have a prayer meeting.
We gotta seek the face of God.
Notice the truth in 1 Timothy chapter number two.
Paul speaking here to his son of the faith, Timothy.
We understand that Paul was.
man of prayer. Paul was a man that as God would use him to record much of our
New Testament, to be the human penman for much of our New Testament, we find that
that many times God allowed for the Apostle Paul to write to those that he
ministered to and to record the prayers that he offered for those particular
people. And what a blessing to hear how Paul was praying. He didn't just simply
say on many occasions, I'm praying for you. No, he said I'm praying for you and
here's how I'm praying for you. And he prayed according to what he understood
with regard to who God is. And in 1st Timothy 2 as he's giving this
instruction under the inspiration of the Holy Spirit of God to his son in the
faith Timothy, he says in verse number 1, I exhort therefore that first of all, I
have it underlined in my Bible that phrase first of all. Why? Because there is
a priority that God places upon the subject of prayer. Not last of all, but
first of all. How many times if we'd be honest this morning we are guilty in our
lives of trying to do so many things to resolve so many issues and then when
everything fails we say you know maybe we should pray about this. Prayer should
be our first response, not our last resort. And he says first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men. He
says in verse number 8, I will therefore that men pray everywhere lifting up holy
hands without wrath and doubting. Wow. The first response. The immediate response to
the situation back in Daniel 2. Go back there with me. The immediate response is
Daniel saying we need some time because we need to have a prayer meeting. We
have a prayer meeting. Listen, Daniel did not gather his friends and try to
develop an escape route. How are we gonna avoid this? What are we
gonna do? We need to have some time so that we can just plan our escape and how
are we gonna get out of the city? How can we get out of here without anyone
knowing? How can we change our countenance or our image so that people
don't know who we are? No, no. That's not what Daniel does. He prays. He prays. It says in
verse number 17 that he enlisted his companions and Daniel went to his house
and made the thing known to Hananiah, Mishael, and Azariah, his companions. You know
there's something powerful about corporate prayer. Corporate prayer. I'm
thankful that I can go to God anytime for anything by myself. I can go to God. I can
pray and so can you. But you know there's something about corporate prayer. Having a
prayer meeting. Praying together. Wednesday evenings we have prayer and Bible study. Why?
Because we believe that God answers prayer or pray corporately. We find that
he enlists his companions and we find that the Bible says in verse 18 that
they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret. We find
that as Daniel would enlist his friends he no doubt these companions, Hananiah,
Mishael, and Azariah, they're made aware of the situation and they, I believe that as
they go and pray, notice the specific aspect in verse 18 that Daniel and his
fellows should not perish with the rest of the wise men of Babylon. There was only
one way to avoid being put to death and that was to give the king the dream and
the interpretation. Because the king said that if you can't do this thing then
you're going to be put to death and he orders that all the wise men of Babylon
be put to death. And so we find that here in verse 18 that Daniel and his three
companions, the Bible tells us that they go to God in prayer. Listen, the
details of the prayer, the actual writing out of the prayer. In chapter 9 you read
the prayer of Daniel. I mean it's provided for us. In many instances in the
life of Paul you read how that he's praying specifically, but here we find
that the specifics of the prayer are not given except for the fact that they say
that the God of heaven would give us mercies with regard to this
secret. So they had something specific that they were praying about. I believe
that you could argue this morning that not only were they specific in prayer
but they were fervent in prayer. You know why I believe that? Because they're about to die.
Amen? Specific and fervent. You know we need to be specific in our prayers. We need to be
specific as we seek God's face as we pray. How do we know if God answers
prayer if all we do is pray general prayers? If we just pray God just bless
everybody. I mean bless them and bless them good. What does that even mean? Because I
would submit to you this morning and I don't have time to to prove it to you
but I'd certainly be willing to do so not within this service but another time.
Listen, not everything that we refer to as a blessing is what God would refer to
as a blessing. Blessings come packaged differently. And what your definition and
my definition of a blessing is not, sometimes it's actually a curse. They
prayed specifically. God, there's a matter. God, we know that you're God. We know what
you're capable of doing. We understand who you are. We're going to read in just a few
moments what Daniel knew about God. Why would Daniel go to God and ask God to
reveal to him a dream that Nebuchadnezzar had and provide an
interpretation? Because he knew who God was. Listen, if Daniel did not know the
greatness of God, there's absolutely no reason that Daniel would ever seek God
to answer a prayer like this. But Daniel seeks God because he knows who God is
and he knows the greatness of God. And we find that not only were they specific
but they were fervent. Listen, James in chapter 5 and verse 16 tells us this,
that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much. How fervent
are we in prayer? We find that, I believe this morning, that Daniel and his
companions, they prayed believing. They prayed believing. Why do I say that? Well
because in verse number 16, Daniel said give him time and that he would show the
king the interpretation. Daniel, I believe, when he went to God in prayer with his
three companions in verse 18, I believe that Daniel had every fiber of his being.
He believed that God could. Just like we find in Daniel chapter number 3 when
those three same companions stand before Nebuchadnezzar because they didn't bow
before the image that was created and Nebuchadnezzar says I'm gonna give you
another opportunity boys because otherwise you're gonna go in that fiery
furnace and they say listen let it be known that we're not gonna bow to your
image. Our God is able to deliver us and if not then still let it be known we're
not gonna bow to your image because they believe that God was able. We read
Daniel 3 and we see that God didn't deliver them from the fiery furnace but
God delivered them through the fiery furnace and for most of us this morning
we'd rather be delivered from something than through something. Amen? But they
got delivered through it and we still talk about it today. Hallelujah. We serve a
great God. They prayed believing. Daniel believed that God would do what only God
could do. Daniel understood that it wasn't within himself to be able to
figure out who, what Nebuchadnezzar dreamed and what the interpretation.
Remember all of those people that were gathered together the Bible says in
verse number 2 of our passage of scripture in Daniel 2 that he, Nebuchadnezzar,
he got all the astrologers, the sorcerers, the magicians and all the
Chaldeans and they say there's not a man upon the earth that can show the King's
matter. It's just not possible. But you know what Daniel will say when he gets
before Nebuchadnezzar? We're not gonna really study it this morning for sake of
time but notice what he says in verse 28. There is a God in heaven. There is a God
in heaven that revealeth secrets. See Daniel believed. We're to pray in faith
believing that God is able. Notice the promises in 1st John. We could go to so
many passages this morning but turn to 1st John chapter 3 if you will. I want
you to look at two verses of scripture within the book of 1st John with regard
to this idea of praying, believing that God is able. Praying, believing that God
is able and I understand at times we may be like the man that spoke to Jesus
and Jesus is having that interaction with him and he says, Lord I believe, help
thou mine unbelief. You've been there, I've been there but we understand this
morning that our God is great and he's powerful and he's able and the Bible
says in 1st John 3 and verse number 22 notice what it says, and whatsoever we
ask we receive of him. Why? Because we keep his commandments and do those
things that are pleasing in his sight. Now what a blessing to think about the
result of obedience as it's mentioned in verse 22 of 1st John 3 that as we walk
in his ways as we obey his commandments
commandments, that we can have confidence that God hears us and God answers us and God
works.
In 1 John chapter number 5 and verses 14 and 15, notice what the Bible says, and this is
the confidence that we have in Him.
Listen, our confidence is not in us, our confidence is not in, well, I have the ability to pray.
No.
It's not in your ability to wax eloquent.
We just come before God as hopeless, helpless people in need of what He can do.
But if we ask anything according to His will, He heareth us, He heareth us.
How do we know if it's according to His will?
Well, you better get in His Word and find out if it's according to His will.
Pastor, I've been praying for that new whatever, I've been praying for that, no, no, no, what's
according to His will?
Verse 15, if we know that He hear us, do you see the confidence, the believing?
If we know that He hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that
we desired of Him.
Listen, this morning, God wants us to pray believing that He's able.
God's revealed His greatness to us so that it would impact our behavior.
God has made known to you and to me how great He is as we study through the pages of this
precious book.
He has revealed His greatness so that it would impact our daily lives, so that it would impact
how we pray.
We see in Daniel's life, his prayer life was impacted by what he believed to be true
about God.
We see the situation reported, we see the supplication recorded, number three this morning,
we see the secret revealed.
You know the wonderful thing?
God answered prayer.
God answered!
And God still answers today.
I wonder this morning, do you keep any kind of record of when God answers prayer?
Because you know what happens in your life and in my life as God answers prayer, you
know it encourages us and it builds our faith.
And it causes us to continue to seek God's face in prayer.
Why?
Because God often answers prayer.
And when we pray specifically, we can know that God answers specifically and we see what
God is able to do.
Notice in our text of Scripture, the Bible says in verse number 19, I don't know how
long the prayer meeting was.
Truly, it could have been a couple of minutes, it could have been a couple of hours, I don't
know the amount of time, but then, then is how verse 19 begins, was the secret revealed
unto Daniel in a night vision.
Can you imagine Daniel's excitement?
Can you imagine how thrilled they must have been?
I mean, they believed that God could, but God did.
God answered.
God revealed to Daniel the dream and the interpretation and we find that as Daniel receives the answer
that he was seeking from God, he understood who God was, he understood who God was and
what God was able to do, we find that the Bible says that then was the secret revealed
unto Daniel.
Remember, what were they praying?
That they would desire mercies of the God of heaven concerning this secret.
Then was the secret revealed unto Daniel.
I mean, hallelujah that we serve a God who hears and answers prayer, that he worked in
Daniel's life and that he still works today in your life and in my life and he answers
prayer.
But I want you to notice something extremely important with regard to the subject matter
of prayer as we look in Daniel chapter number two.
We've mentioned how that there was an immediate response and for you and I this morning, we
must get to the place where our immediate response to the circumstances, the troubles,
the difficulties in life is prayer, is prayer, depending on the God of the universe.
The one who said, let there be light and there was light, that's my God.
If you're saved this morning, that's your God and he's able and he hears, he's promised
to do so.
But I want you to notice even as we look at the immediate response of Daniel and the supplication
that is recorded, I notice in our text of scripture something extremely important and
I want you to think just for a moment if we can consider this passage of scripture and
I think that we would agree that it was an urgent matter.
The decree had already been issued.
The king, Nebuchadnezzar, he is angry and very furious.
He's irate.
He's made an irrational decree and then here comes Daniel and says, would you give us some
time and we'll show you the interpretation.
So the secret is revealed.
What is our thought with regard to what would happen next?
I mean, make a beeline directly to Nebuchadnezzar and say, hey, Nebuchadnezzar, I got the answer
for you.
Here's the dream and here's the interpretation.
But that's not what happens.
That's not what happens.
In the midst of an urgent matter, in the midst of a life and death situation, Daniel said
we need to pray.
God answers prayer and you know what Daniel says?
We need to rejoice.
We need to take time to worship God.
We need to take time to thank God for the answer that He gave to prayer.
Notice with me in verse number 19.
The Bible says, then was the secret revealed unto Daniel in a night vision.
Then Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
But it doesn't stop there.
It actually records for us his rejoicing more than it records for us his prayer.
Think about that for a moment.
We talked in Sunday school about a lack of gratitude.
Will we hear more frequently in our lives?
I asked this question at the start of Sunday school this morning in general.
Generally speaking, on any given day in your life, do you hear more complaining or more
rejoicing?
Every single person that was in Sunday school this morning said, generally speaking, they
hear in a specific day more complaining than rejoicing.
How many times do we pray and then God answers and we don't even thank Him?
We don't even take time to thank Him for answering our prayers.
Maybe when we pray we'll say, God and we will give you the glory and then God answers and
we just go.
But notice what happens.
It says that Daniel blessed the God of heaven.
Verse 20, Daniel answered and said, blessed be the name of God forever and ever for wisdom
and might are His.
This is a time of rejoicing.
This is a time of worship.
Listen our God is eternal.
Aren't you thankful for that?
Daniel says blessed be the name of God forever and ever.
He is the eternal God.
He is alpha and omega.
He has no beginning and no ending.
He is the self-sufficient one.
He is the all-knowing one.
He says at the end of verse number 20, for wisdom and might are His.
He is the omniscient God.
He has all wisdom.
He is the omnipotent God.
He has all power.
And you begin to think about the worship of Daniel.
When Daniel receives a response, when Daniel receives an answer from God, when God reveals
to Daniel the secret, the very thing that Daniel was praying about as he sought the
face of God in urgency, in fervency, very specific, he enlisted his friends and God
answers and Daniel says, though it's a life and death situation, though the matter is
urgent, though the decree has been given with haste, I must stop and rejoice.
I must stop and praise my God.
Listen, it's a key in this passage of Scripture that we thank God.
He's the omnipotent God.
He's the omniscient God.
He's the eternal God.
Notice in verse 21, and He changeth the times and the seasons.
Just think about that for a moment.
Why?
Because He's God.
I can't do that.
He can't do that.
God can.
I'm not sure, but maybe Daniel had a record of Joshua.
Do you remember when Joshua prayed that God would cause the sun to stand still?
What would even possess a man to pray that prayer?
What they believed to be true about God.
Because if God made the sun, God can cause it to stand still.
You understand what I'm saying?
I don't know that Daniel read that report of Joshua and the land, but what I'm saying
is that Daniel says, you're the God who changes times and seasons.
Notice He removeth kings and setteth up kings.
You know, Nebuchadnezzar had a pride issue.
Nebuchadnezzar thought he was the man, and in a certain sense he was.
But you know, God showed him who he was.
And God is the one that sets up and removes.
He's the one that rules in the affairs of man.
The Bible tells us in the Proverbs.
Proverbs, that the heart of the king is what? It's in the hand of the Lord. And he turneth
it withersoever he wills. Amen? That's Bible. That's what the Bible teaches us. And so Daniel,
he's rejoicing. He says this, he giveth wisdom unto the wise, and knowledge to them that
know understanding. You know, as we seek God, and we seek the face of God, God will give
us wisdom, knowledge, understanding. Our God is the all-wise God. You understand that we're
speaking about heavenly wisdom, not earthly wisdom. There's a difference. James talks
about some of those differences. The wisdom that's from above. That's the wisdom that
we need. The Bible speaks about those that do not know God in the book of Romans in the
first chapter, professing themselves to be wise. They became fools. And here we find
that Daniel is rejoicing. Notice in verse 22, he revealeth the deep and secret things.
He knoweth what is in the darkness, and the light dwelleth with him. As I'm going to read
verse 20 through 22, I see evidence, not only as Daniel is rejoicing and praising God, but
I see evidence here in these verses of Scripture of what Daniel believed about who God is,
and how that belief shaped his prayer. And now he's thanking God. He's rejoicing. In
verse 23, the Bible says, I thank thee and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, who
has given me wisdom and might, and has made known unto me now what we desired of thee.
For thou hast now made known unto us the king's matter. I believe that as we look here in
this passage of Scripture and we see Daniel taking time to pause and thank God, it's such
an important truth for us. Because in our lives, we sometimes can get so busy, so distracted
with so many things, we pray about something and God answers, and we just kind of keep
on rolling. But Daniel says, we've got to thank God. We've got to thank God. Daniel
did not say, man, we're pretty smart guys. We figured this thing out. No. God gave us
wisdom. God revealed this thing to me. You notice very specifically in verse 23, he says,
I thank thee and praise thee, O thou God of my fathers, notice who has given me wisdom
and might. Why? Because he prayed for it. And has made known unto me now what we desired
of thee. For thou hast now made known unto us the king's matter. Daniel will then call
and he'll enter into the presence. Notice the confidence again in verse number 24. The
Bible says, therefore Daniel went in unto Ariok, whom the king had ordained to destroy
the wise men of Babylon. He went and said thus unto him, destroy not the wise men of
Babylon. Bring me in before the king, and I will show unto the king the interpretation.
Daniel was confident because he knows that God revealed it. And he just testified of
that. I mentioned earlier, he stands before Nebuchadnezzar and Daniel says that there
is a God in heaven that revealeth secrets. This morning, we serve the same God that Daniel
We serve a God who's able. He said to do what? He's able. We sing the song, He's able to
deliver thee. We think about Daniel chapter number 6. When Daniel is asked after he's
going to be cast there into the den of lions and after the king, Darius had did everything
within his power to deliver Daniel from having to go into the den of lions, we find that
he says that thou, your God who you serve continually, He'll deliver thee. That's exactly
what God did. That's exactly what God did. I'm not sure what you're facing this morning.
I don't know what you're dealing with this morning. But I know that our God hears and
answers prayer. And I know that we must place a priority, an emphasis on the subject of
prayer. And I understand this morning that my prayer life is going to be shaped, your
prayer life is going to be shaped by what we truly believe about who God is. If we don't
understand these things that we've studied throughout this year, if we don't understand
how great God is, then our prayers are not going to be proving God to do something that
only God can do. Why don't you pray about that? You think about somebody making that
statement and somebody that doesn't know how great God is. It's confusing to them. But
this morning, when we know the God of the universe, you get that news, you get that
report, you receive that, whatever it might be. What's our immediate response? What do
we do? Do we say, you know what? We need to pray about this. We have a prayer meeting.
We seek the face of God. Because there's nothing I can do through this situation. I'm not able.
I need God. I believe this morning that prayer is the greatest revelation of our dependence
upon Him. We pray. We seek His face. This morning, does your prayer life, does my prayer
life reveal that we believe that God is great? That we believe that He's the God of the impossible?
That we believe that He's able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask or think?
What does your prayer life, what does my prayer life reveal about what we believe to
be true about God? I believe that if we were to take inventory, as we have an opportunity
here this morning, I think we'd all agree this morning that after reading Daniel 2,
that Daniel believed that God was able and that Daniel believed God was great. Daniel
had an understanding of God's greatness that directly impacted how he prayed. Do you agree
this morning? I mean, it's obvious in our lives. We too must be people of prayer. Why
are we spending three weeks on the subject? I mean, the weeks are short. I mean, it's
November 5th. We only have so many weeks left in this calendar year. We'll start a new theme
in 2024. Why would I spend three weeks on the subject of prayer? Because I need it.
If I could say it with all kindness and truthfulness, you need it as well. We need it. We need to
be challenged with regard to our prayer lives. We need to examine our prayer lives. And we
need to say, God, does my prayer life really reveal how great You are? Because as I read
the pages of this precious book, our God is so great. And so often we pray such puny prayers.
To a God who said, let there be light, and there was light. To a God who made the stars
also. To a God who redeemed us, saved us, so we could go to heaven. I hope this morning
that by looking at Daniel 2, we've been challenged. I hope we've been encouraged. Our God hears
and answers prayer. But I hope we've been challenged. What does my prayer life, what
does your prayer life reveal about what we believe to be true about God? Let's pray.
Father, we love You. We thank You so much for loving us. We thank You for the privilege
of being able to serve You. Of being able to enter into Your presence. What a privilege
to pray. And God, I pray that in these moments of invitation that we would truly examine
our lives and examine our prayer lives. We'd be honest, humble, thorough, to truly answer
the question, what does my prayer life reveal about what I believe to be true about God?
Lord, if there's one here that's not sure of heaven, they do not know the Lord Jesus
Christ as their personal Savior. In fact, if they were to die today, they have no assurance
that heaven is their home. They hope to go to heaven. They'd like to go to heaven. They
do not know for sure. They've never trusted Christ as their Savior. I pray that You'd
move and work in their hearts and lives today. They'd be saved. We'd have an opportunity
to take a Bible and show them how they could know for sure that they could be saved, that
they'd be heaven-bound. For every child of God this morning, would You work in our hearts?
Would You help us to do business with You as we've been ready to receive truth? I pray
now in these moments of invitation that we'd be ready to respond. We'll thank You for every
decision that's made. We'll thank You, God, for the way that You'll work. For it's in
Christ's name we pray. Would You stand with me?